    Change the Status of the ECN Nonce (RFC 3540) to Historic

Receiving hosts can fool a sender into downloading faster by suppressing
feedback of ECN marks or losses. The ECN Nonce (RFC 3540) was proposed
to allow a TCP sender to ensure the integrity of congestion feedback,
thus detecting this attack.

If the TCP receiver opts in, and the server supports it, the ECN Nonce
works as specified. However, since RFC 3540 was published in Jun 2003,
widespread usage in the Internet has not materialized. A study of the
ECN behaviour of the Alexa top 1M web servers using 2014 data
[Trammell15] found that after ECN was negotiated, none of the 581,711
IPv4 servers tested were using both the ECT(1) and the ECT(0)
codepoints, which would have been evidence of ECN Nonce usage. Of the
17,028 IPv6 servers tested, 4 set both ECT(0) and ECT(1) on data
packets. This might have been evidence of use of the ECN Nonce by these
4 servers, but might equally have been due to re- marking of the ECN
field by an erroneous middlebox or router.

The ECN Nonce would be nearly impossible to deploy now, because any
misbehaving receiver can simply opt-out, which would be unremarkable
given all receivers currently opt-out.

RFC 3540 consumes a 2-bit codepoint of the ECN field in the IPv4 and
IPv6 headers. It also consumes a TCP flag bit in the main TCP header. If
the capability provided by the ECN Nonce is required in future, other
approaches have been developed that do not consume space in the IP or
TCP headers (see Appendix C.1 of [I-D.ietf-tsvwg-ecn-l4s-id]).

By parking on these codepoints, RFC 3540 is standing in the way of new
experimental capabilities that depend on the use of these codepoints
for other purposes. Continuing to reserve these codepoints for the ECN
Nonce experiment is no longer justified.

[I-D.ietf-tsvwg-ecn-experimentation] makes the procedural arrangements
for reclassification of RFC 3540 as historic: 
   * It updates the wording of RFCs 3168, 6679, 4341, 4342, 5622, which
     all specified optional aspects of their respective protocols that
     were dependent on RFC 3540 (no evidence has been found that these
     protocol options have been implemented or deployed).
   * It requests that IANA modifies its registries to record the
     availability of the ECT(1) codepoint in the IP (v4 and v6)
     headers and the NS flag in the main TCP header.

References.

   [Trammell15]
              Trammell, B., Kuehlewind, M., Boppart, D., Learmonth, I.,
              Fairhurst, G., and R. Scheffenegger, "Enabling Internet-
              Wide Deployment of Explicit Congestion Notification".
              In Proc Passive & Active Measurement (PAM'15) Conference
              (2015)

   [I-D.ietf-tsvwg-ecn-l4s-id] 
              Schepper, K., Briscoe, B., and I. Tsang, "Identifying
              Modified Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) Semantics
              for Ultra-Low Queuing Delay", draft-ietf-tsvwg-ecn-l4s-
              id-00 (work in progress), April 2017.

   [I-D.ietf-tsvwg-ecn-experimentation]
              Black, D., "Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN)
              Experimentation", draft-ietf-tsvwg-ecn-experimentation-02
              (work in progress), April 2017.


